And
the modern Iran, at least the one that I'm
acquainted with, dated back really to the former
Shah's father, Reza Shah, who even though they say
the Peacock Throne has existed for 2,000 years,
something like that, his father was an illiterate
sergeant and a cavalry. They called it the
Cossack. It was based on the Russian Cossack. And
actually, I think he was up and from in the
Azerbaijan area there. And so he led the
revolution that overthrew a very unpopular Shah.
He had no intention, supposedly, of becoming a
Shah. He was going to become a common leader. Sort
of like Jimmy Carter walking, you know, to the
inauguration and that sort of thing. But by public
demand, they wanted him to become the shot. So here
you got a guy who's the illiterate sergeant,
former sergeant, who becomes the leader of the
nation. He did have the ability with his
down-to-earth leadership to appeal or to form a
coalition, really, with all of the tribal
leaders. And in the tribe, if you've been in Iran,
they have their own really governmental
structure. And he was able to pull all of them
together to support the central government,
which they hate. They hate now. They hate it in
Korea. They hate it in Vietnam. Anywhere you go,
out in the boondocks, they don't care about
communism. They won't be left alone,
particularly in Iran. So his only problem was that
He was a great admirer of Germany, and he had German
advisors. He was a great admirer of Hitler. And so
coming to World War II, the British had him move to
South Africa, where he died. But Shaw still was
young. But he was popular. And Shaw then inherited
the throne later on. Of course, he was a
tempest-made on his life. It wounded him, but he
wasn't. It wasn't seriously wounded. So he became
a shot. He was popular. He was popular when we were
there. He was a good man. He was highly trained. He
was an expert on military subjects worldwide, all
about the British, our Army, Navy, Air Force,
German, French. He was a scholar of military
operations.
He was schooled, of course, in Switzerland. Also,
he graduated with their own military academy. And
he was a good man. He intended to modernize Iran,
land reform, which he implemented, which made the
rich people unhappy, and the Mullahs very
unhappy. But he accomplished it. So they had this
sort of a mutual, might have been kind of shaky, but
a mutual coalition. Of course, a coalition,
that's redundant. It would be mutual. of all of the
tribes around Iran. And as we talked about, he had
positioned a division or a brigade in the large
population center, mainly recruited from the
tribes. And for a while, they had no problem,
because all you have to do is tell the tribal leader
that your quota is 200 young men, for example. And
they would produce them. It's only when it starts
getting, you lose the support of these tribes,
then you have a time. of getting your number of
people. So the Shah was very responsive, and he
knew what our mission was. We were paid, by the way,
the mission by the Iranian government in addition
to our own paycheck. I paid a great big old check
amount like this. The military assistance group
didn't get that. So the Iranians then felt that we
worked for them in a way. So we were more than just
visitors in the country. We were actually...
which we couldn't be legally, but this was legal,
it was approved, and the employment to a certain
degree of the right. And I enjoyed it very much. We
had several meetings with the Shah. Could you
describe him? He was a very quiet individual, a
very thoughtful individual. As you noticed in
interviews before he died, he usually would
think, it wasn't that he didn't have a command of
the English language, because of course he spoke
British English and not American English. But
what impressed me, as I already said, was his
knowledge, military knowledge, of all weapons. I
don't mean he just had a speaking acquaintance
with them, but he knew the character wisdom of the
weapon, you know, the weight and all that sort of
thing. And so it It wasn't just briefing him. You'd
sit down, and he would actually discuss, because
each time we would go, and I would go with the
general, because I was a G3, talking about what's
proposed for the next year. Even then, he'd ask for
more, and then they could actually assimilate.
But that was the nature of that assignment, trying
to get along politically with the Iranians,
trying to train them. Was
communism a big fear? Well,
as you know, too, you could draw a circle around
Tehran, about, say, 50, 100 kilometers around
Tehran. And that's really the seat. That's where
the power is. Communism out in the provinces, The
Tudor party, for example, didn't exist. It
existed, though, in Tehran, because that's where
it's important. And it wasn't popular with
Iranians until Mosaddegh, for example, who
definitely was not a communist at all.
He was forced towards the Tudor party. But
Mosaddegh,
first they blamed the British, and they kicked out
the British. After they nationalized the oil. In
1951, they nationalized the British oil. And they
didn't think the Iranians could operate the
refinery down at Abaddon and also the others. But
they did because the British, as they've done
everywhere you know, as opposed to many other
colonial powers, the British always trained the
next echelon down. If this guy was the head of
department or the assistant was a local native, So
the British could move out and operate. Now, they
couldn't. They couldn't over a long period of time
as far as maintenance is concerned. And that's
where the Americans came in. But they kicked out
the British. Mosaddegh had blamed all of the
problems of the country on the British. And you
read newspaper articles now, and you are left
impression in those particular times that the
modulus was elected by popular vote, see? And the
Shah dissolved the Majlis and kicked out
Mosaddegh because he was a tyrant, and he was
unpopular. They wanted to get rid of him. And he,
beginning right then, that's the reason we all
hate the Shah, because that is when the Americans
should not have supported the Shah. They should
have let him remain in Italy, and then we would have
had democracy in Iran way back in 1951. or 52 when
actually most of that got kicked out. That's not
true. He was very popular. How do I know he's
popular? Not only by going around visiting, which
I went all over Iran, but we used the Shah's train to
go up to Bandershah up on the Caspian. We wanted to
go there because it was a picturesque trip. The
Scandinavian countries, I don't remember which
one it was, might have been your ancestors.
engineers that carved out those tunnels, and they
go up this mountain. You can travel for about 30
minutes, and on the map, you haven't made any
progress, just altitude. You can look back down
and see where you were 30 minutes before. And then
you go through the mountain, and you go on the other
side, and you do the same thing to get across the
mountain. The people up and down had no idea that
the Shah's train was coming along there. Or was it
the Shah? Of course, I imagine the railroad.
clearing it, but I got the word out. But because it
was a Shah's train at the station where we stopped,
people would come up with flowers to put on the
train. And how they got the word while we were
sitting there, I don't know. But of course, the
Shah went there. General McClure was there, and
then McClure and Meany, and yours truly. And so to
me, that's not evidence of an unpopular
individual at all. Well, what about that charge
about Mosaddegh and that it would have had
so-called democracy back in 1951 or 1952? What
about that? Mosaddegh didn't have any following
nationwide. He had some following in Tehran, but
he was a good friend of our nation. Ambassador
Henderson support him. In fact, we're the ones who
helped him escape. Yeah. You know him? He's a real
fine guy. Yeah, he was ambassador at the time. We
helped him escape from his house when he was
attacked and helped him get into hiding. And so
regardless of how the outcome would have been, the
United States would still have been friendly to
that government. It's not like Khomeini and all of
that sort of thing. Of course, I guess that's what
good diplomacy is, when you have a favorable
situation where regardless of which way the
outcome. But
if the Shah hadn't returned, I think we would
probably end up with a friction just like we have
now. But see, there wasn't a period of purging like
Khomeini did. See, anyone who's Western
educated, and that's all you doctors and lawyers
and you educate and so forth, they purge them.
They're either out of the country or in jail or
dead. So I really couldn't predict what would have
happened then if Shaw hadn't returned. But he
didn't permanently leave. He left, and it's true
of the reports, I wasn't with CIA at that time. I was
later on, which we'll talk about. But he left
temporarily. on our suggestion so that this
overthrow could occur, which was really
bloodless. A few people got killed. They shot up
Mosaddegh's house with a tank. Who engineered
this overthrow? General Bakhtiari, the same
division commander that I was telling you about. I
should say he supported. He provided the troops.
He was really occupying Tehran and getting
Mossadegh out. Nobody hurt Mossadegh. It was very
embarrassing to us. I knew nothing about the CIA
working. You had to have funds and somebody that
was working. But the Iranian CIA, like a lot of
people think, American goes in and he leads the
charge. Well, you don't. It's all by contacts.
We were embarrassed, at least I was, because the
best regimental commander we had in Tehran,
he had the responsibility to put the security on
Mosaddegh area. So he discharged his
responsibility. And so it was his tanks that was
defending Mosaddegh's house. So he ended up by
being arrested and put in prison, see, because he
was doing what he was supposed to. He didn't stay
there very long. But he was doing exactly what he
was supposed to do, and he was doing a good job. But
that was earlier. The only bloodshed was the
exchange between this colonel's forces and
General Bakhtiari's forces. So the Shah was in
Rome. He came back. I guess a lot of people out in the
province didn't even know anything like this
happened. Of course, a number of people in the
United States recently charged that the CIA
really engineered the overthrow. and brought the
shawl back. Well, that's true. That's true. It
would never have occurred if CIA hadn't been
involved in it. Well, what specifically was their
involvement? Well, they provided the money and
the contacts and the assurance that the United
States would support Bakhtiar if he overthrew,
well, much overthrowing, just getting rid of
Mozadegh. Because the modules wasn't properly
elected, half of them were appointed by the shahs,
and the other half, like the lower and the higher
house that we have, they were
so-called elected, but even they were more
appointed. They've had an election here
recently. I mean, those people actually voted.
But this other way that... What was your opinion
toward this interference in another country's
internal affairs? Well, I think it was the best
interest of the United States for the Shah to
continue to be, because I'm sure that that country
would have gone communistic because the Tudor
party was gaining control. That's the reason why
they had to overthrow the government. Vostok had
to turn to the Tudors. That was the only one he had
left. And the USSR thought, this is it now. We're
going to get Iran. Because who is going to stand
between us then? Do you remember what Ambassador
Henderson had to do, what the ONZ had to do with
this? Oh, he'd have to have complete knowledge.
You couldn't go in and operate without him. We had
members of the CIA. In fact, a friend of mine I
didn't know at the time was on this. Ambassador
Henderson's staff, he's a military type. He was
there as a civilian. He was a contact, in other
words, between Henderson and the CIA. And also,
the faction also used in that was a, Tehran has
athletic clubs that are very popular. You know,
the old ancient,
really some art more than anything else. And the
Shah is a member of that. Of course, he heads all of
them. So they were all pro-Shah. The country was
pro-Shah. There's no question in my mind. People
are trying to rewrite history and judge the Shah
later, like, with what occurred then. It's just no
comparison at all. Why do you think the Shah seemed
to lose popularity
over the next generation? You mean... Yeah, why do
you think that if you think he was popular in the
early 50s, why was he so unpopular by the late
1970s? I think we contributed, the United States
contributed to that. When we were there, it was
only internal security, see, those were the
forces. Later on, and of course he's modernized,
things were getting better there. But I think what
really contributed most to his downfall is when
the United States says, now we're going to look to
you to be the strong man in the Middle East. No
longer we expect you to maintain internal
security. Obviously, you can do that. But we need
someone who can sort of be the peace enforcer in the
area, suggesting that perhaps you get modern
aircraft and modern Navy, which they did. did
have, then you would be in a position to utilize
this force if needed in other parts of the Middle
East. But mainly, you would be a deterrent, being
strong, that no one would perhaps attack, say, in
Saudi Arabia or
Iraq. Of course, Iraq was always the last people
when we were there. They were leaning towards the
USSR.
But it's no doubt in my mind that Mossadegh was
forced to turn to the Tudor party, and he would
never have been able to turn loose of that tiger
that he had to the tail. Now, one might say, well,
maybe that would have been better, but it
wouldn't, because the USSR would be on down the
Persian Gulf. They'd have a puppet government
there, just like they try to have in Afghanistan.
See, all they have to do, they have a treaty with
them now. All they have to do is to say, help. I think
that goes back to 1921, isn't it? You're the expert
on history. And some are fearsome now that this may
occur. The USSR said, well, we're invited to come
down. They needed our security. Turmoil,
anarchy. The government existed to ask for help.
What about the internal security, the whole idea
of internal security over the last 25 years? Many
people have charged at the Shaw, built up the
secret forces, secret service forces, and then
started to torture people, and you've heard it
all. And I was wondering about our role back in the
early 1950s as far as helping him set up internal
security and if we knew any of this torture was
going on. No. Not when I was there, because they
hadn't advanced to that point. See, we didn't even
have advisors in the field, I think. We were all in
Tehran. And when you say we, how many were there?
Oh, I guess our mission there, we had about 30, and I
guess there were about 10 others in the MAG, the
Military Assistance Group. That includes
officers and non-commissioned officers. And so
the training all was occurring in the Tehran area.
Those would come from the province and would come
in to school that we established. And we were just
getting them established. We were also sending
officers to the United States. And you had two
factions in the armed forces. Previously, they
had been going to France to school. French was the
second language. They went into English also. But
a lot of them didn't speak English. So then, before
they go to the United States, of course, speak
English. And there were a lot of, a lot of them were
resentful of Americans because they didn't like
the British. Of course, they, English speaking,
and here we come in. And they sort of identified us
with the British rather than France. But, now the
other thing besides this building up to Shaw, this
tremendous American population had moved in
there. Yeah. Now, they even resented us when we
were there in small numbers. See? Do you have any
examples of resentment? Well, you know, we
provided transportation. Our government did. We
had Chevrolet sedans and had license, Iranian
license plates on them. And so one day, my driver
was sitting waiting, and this Iranian officer
came up and says, I'm taking over this car. I want to
go somewhere. He said, but you can't. This is
Colonel Andrews' car. He said, I don't care. So he
forced the driver to drive it off, of course, in the
report. He thought that was an Iranian car. He
thought their government had bought this car for
us, which it wasn't. It was our own car. And they
just resented us having a sedan, and they rode
around in Jeeps.
That's one example. Now, what about this thing
about internal security? We really didn't help as
far as building up this police force. You're
talking about Savick, huh? Yeah. One other, by the
way, after Mosaddegh was overthrown, there were
plans that were found for the assassination of
America. Of Americans? Yeah. Us, we lived up at
Tajri Circle, for example, and the plan was how
they were going to take care of us. And, of course,
we had vehicles we kept there. We had an evacuation
plan for if we had to get to Tehran Air Base to be
evacuated. So not only do I say that if it didn't
turn out successful, even though Loy Henderson
was being very friendly with Mossadegh,
something might have happened to the American
population that that were there. And I'm sure the
USSR, just like we had CIA, they also operating in
there. And they probably would desire to have some
Americans killed, because that would indicate
that Ronnie was unhappy with them, and they were
unwelcome. They shouldn't have ever been there.
But they had, of course, a security force,
clandestine, no doubt, that we were there. But I
wasn't aware. because I wasn't around the country
of any other people put in jail. Now, the Iranians,
they mistreated the troops. They'd slap them and
kick them. And even at that time, they could
denounce somebody, and they wouldn't have a
trial. They'd go put them in, and they'd stay in
there for weeks and months, just like they're
doing now, except now they're killing them. In
other words, the same Iranians, what they're
doing now, were Iranians, what they were doing
then. The other was the Shah's force. Now, at least
the Shah never did say, go out and kill these
people. He claims he wasn't even aware if it was,
and I don't think he was. But he's responsible
because his people did it. But they're brutal as
long as they have the upper hand. And they like to
have turmoil. Even when we were there, they'd say,
let's go down to the bazaar and have a shalook. A
shalook there, you know, it was marching and
yelling, waving their hands, yelling slogans.
And they push each other. They call that a chaluk,
you know, organ and all that sort of thing. In fact,
we even had an Iranian officer told me one time he
didn't want to fly with the Iranian pilots because
the landing and takeoff is a chaluk. They even
disagree on what they're doing on getting the gear
up and landing. He said, I'm going to go fly with
them. No, they like chalukes. That's the reason
you see them all. And then you give them a TV camera.
They really like to demonstrate. They all want to
be martyrs. You know, they beat themselves. Yet
they take animal blood and put it all over them, you
know, and beat as if, boy, they beat themselves and
they're just bleeding all over. When they have a
technique where they hit here instead of the
chain, you know, hit there. Very emotional
people, I think. Difficult to really understand.
Tell me about Lloyd Henderson. What type of man was
he? A real... I think a model diplomat,
soft-spoken ability.
He told us one day, he says
he was laughing because the USSR just experienced
a setback. I think the Iranians kicked out one of
their diplomats there. And he laughed and he said,
the secret weapon the Iranians have that the USSR
just can't figure them out. Well, everything I've
been discussing, nobody else can really figure
them out because they're unpredictable. The Shah
wasn't unpredictable. That's the reason I think
he was a real stabilizing force. He was popular.
But when he got all of this equipment, brought in
all of these Americans, and they set up their own
community, and ignored the Iranians, except the
rich, wealthy Iranians. They had resentment.
That should never happen, but he had to do that. You
bring all this sophisticated equipment,
Iranians can't operate. Now, you said before that
you were later with the CIA. Was that in Iran? No.
I'd like to leave in Iran. And I didn't even know my
friend was a CIA until I joined the CIA. Where it
says support group on that thing, that's a cover
for CIA. Oh, okay.
Were you happy to leave Iran in 1954? Well, after
two years, yeah. My wife Mimi had a couple of
operations. Of course, she had to leave Iran and go
to Germany to do that. About two years. I had a lot of
Iranian friends, and we enjoyed it very much. Very
frustrating. Why? Trying to get things
accomplished.
You know, Americans, I also want to read Americans
were unpopular with some of the Iranians because
we were impatient. You know, Americans want to do
things and get it done. They want to be able to mark
your progress and have a chart up there. And I think
we made some progress, but not near what you would
expect in two years. We established schools. We
couldn't get the Iranians to agree to set up an
officer candidate school. Yet their military
academy, just like ours, could not produce
sufficient officers. So many of the units were
understaffed with officers. And they didn't want
warrant officers. And their argument was, if you
have warrant officers, Officer candidates, they
had third lieutenants there. Said if you make them
third lieutenants, they'll want to get promoted
like everybody else. And they wanted them to
remain a second-class citizen. They would deal
with them or view them as just a sergeant with
officer rank. Yet, when you send them to school,
They're more knowledgeable than the so-called
military academy drivers. So they're even
jealous of each other. It sounds to me like this is a
tremendous problem of two different cultures not
being able to understand each other. Is that
right?
Yeah, you could probably say that. Now we've got
them educated in the United States, and they come
back. They'd be an entirely different person.
They then were your close friends. They felt
closer to you than they were on you.
Let me give you another example. We sent a lot to
Fort Sam Houston here, to the Brook Medical
Center, to take medical specialists, a little bit
more than medical aid men, but at least they were
laboratory people. They'd come back. They'd hang
up a shingle, go into practice, call themselves
doctor and operator. Now, I'll tell you another
example. Many of them didn't want to come back and
didn't come back. They'd come back. They'd remain
over here. One day, we were looking for an
individual who had been over here to medical
school, to specialist training, not in the
medical school. And it's traced him down. Of
course, we use the FBI here in this country to
locate these people. And their embassy wanted to
find him, the Iranian embassy. And they found this
individual of all places. He was a resident in
Mayo's clinic. Mayo's clinic? Yeah. He convinced
him, he was an exchange student, you know, that he
had finished medical school, and now he was time
for his residency. And they didn't take the time,
you know, they looked at all his papers, and of
course they do have him, have him right. And he was
there, and they said he was doing a pretty good job,
but man, he was practicing medicine in the
hospital, in a big hospital. So then it stopped all
of that, of course. It went out to all of the
hospitals where they really had to be sure they
documented it. So I'm not surprised that our
Iranian students here, they act just like
Iranians. Here at the university now, they have
demonstrations now, pro-Komanian,
anti-Komanian. And yell insults, shalooking at
each other. And get mad at the Americans, because
we won't take sides. The students there say, to
hell with you. Why don't all of you go back? Now,
they aren't pro-Shah. I don't mean to say that.
They're against Komanian. I guess there'd be some
of them in Alpha Bandar songs. Well, you want to
move on to another country? This is really
fantastic. It appears to me that this seems that
this is a very frustrating assignment for you.
Yeah, I want to tell you. Well, I enjoyed it because
it was a challenge, but yeah, it's frustrating. It
kind of gives you ulcers, you know. But
fortunately, we all do, and my commanding general
there is a bit We're all in it together and doing the
best we can. Well, Zimmerman first and then
McClure, General McClure. I want to tell you one
other thing so you better understand that, at
least on the ground. Everything is done in Iran
involves Bakshis. Now, just like in the Far East,
it would be Kamsha, you know, but Bakshi. Now,
Americans might call it TIPS. And the lawyer might
call it a bribe. And this is where we've tied the
hands of industry here in our nation because we can
no longer pay these fees, which is really bocce.
But that's the way they do business. Now, when we
first arrived there, there's a policeman up at
Tawdry Circle. And you say, well, then our house
was right there. It would be safe. Now, it's only
safe if you do this. You go to this policeman and you
say, now, I live here and it's very important that I
don't get robbed. Now, I know that you are really an
outstanding enforcer of the law and nothing like
this would happen with you here on your post. But
for me to show my appreciation of your high
standard of law enforcement, I'm going to give you
each month This Bakshi's here. Of course, he's got
his hand out at all times when he gets it. Now, he
keeps the crooks away from our house because
they're all organized. Now, if I didn't do that,
the crooks come to him and he gives him Bakshi. And
he'll tell him the hours we keep, everything about
it. Do they have a dog? and then you get robbed, see?
Also, of course, in their religion, just like in
Saudi Arabia where they cut off hands and legs and
so forth, there it's not only against the law, but
it's against their religion. But they
rationalize that. They view them as being like
Robin Hood, sort of an honor among thieves. We will
only steal from the wealthy, those who have rather
than wealthy. And we will leave all you poor folks
alone. So they say, well, we don't have much. Al has
not been kind to us. Why shouldn't he? Of course,
all Americans were hunk of sugar as they have ever
were. We were all wealthy, see. But we never got
robbed, because I had sense enough to learn when I
got there. He got degrees of Palmer. Now, that's a
bribe. But maybe it's a tip, because he makes so
little money. And do you remember how much it was a
month? No, I think it's equivalent of about $5 or
something like that, which was a lot of money there
at that time. And they have a thieves market then. I
don't know what they have now. And I mean a real
thieves market. Here, you know, it's a joke. You go
buy secondhand goods and so forth, and they call it
a thieves market. They steal your hubcaps, even
maybe your tires if you don't have them guarded and
locked up. You don't dare park your car out in the
street overnight. If the car is still there, it'll
be stripped. But if you'll hurry and go down to the
thieves market, you can buy back all this
equipment at really a good price. They'll make you
a good deal on this thing. And you go to the police
and you say, but they stole it and I found it down
there. Well, first, he doesn't understand the
language. He doesn't know what you're talking
about. And you say, well, I've got my mark on this
tire here. He says, yeah, over here. You finally
get an interpreter. What did he say? He says, a lot
of tires have marks like that. How do I know that's
his mark? So they're all involved with that, too.
But you'd rather buy it and get it back at a good
bargain price. And they all know that. That's the
way they operate. You can call it dual standard or
back. But if you don't understand all of that,
another thing, you can go to an individual, and you
say, I need this.
Oil and stove, for example. But you're wasting
your time if you try to go down and shop. But you tell
him how much you want to pay. Mr. Maynard was our
great contact man. He could get you reals at a rate
that you couldn't get at the bank or anywhere else.
He could get you a stove cheaper than you can get
anywhere else. And he could expedite it. But
that's the way to do business. Everything's
bordered. And they do steal from the wealthier
runners, just like they do from Americans. I'll
tell you one more on this, and then we'll move on to
another thing. We were telling about, one of our
Americans got robbed, and I was telling the
minister of defense, we were at a party, about
this. He said, we got robbed? I said, really? I
wouldn't think you people would go. Oh, yes. He
said, just the other night. And they lived just
like we had. It's a compound with a big high fence.
And, of course, you ring the bell outside, and
surely a servant comes and answers that during the
day. And the servants and the rich people live in
the back. And, of course, you lock the doors in the
big houses. We didn't have an overnight servant.
We had a woman who worked for us during the daytime
and had a yard man to take care of the yard and the
garden. But he said just the other night, I was, we
were in bed, and I heard a pounding on my door. See,
they'd already gotten over the fence. They didn't
ring the bell out at the door, at the gate. And he
said, I went to the door and opened it, and I said,
what are you doing beating on my door this time of
the night? He said, I beg your pardon, I apologize.
Well, who are you? He said, I'm a thief. I have come
to rob you. Well, why are you beating on the door if
you're going to rob me? He said, because I need your
help, because my partner has fallen in your well,
and I can't get him out. So he said, okay. So he went
and helped this guy get his partner out of the well.
I guess they reinforced a rope or something, and
they got him out. And he just bowed and thanked him
very much. He said, thank you very much for helping
us out. We won't rob you. So he says, goodbye,
thief. So he went his way.
Well, we left Iran and we went to the Armed Forces
Staff College. Yeah, okay, 1955. And I was hopeful
I'd go to the Army War College. Unless you did
later. Went later, but of course at that time I
didn't know it because oftentimes if you went to
the Armed Forces Staff College, then you didn't go
to the other, the National War College or Army War
College. But that was a real good course, because
there you went Army, Navy, and Air Force, and
Marines.
And it's not much exciting that took place there.
It was just a routine school. How long did it last? I
recall that was a five-month course. And it's
basically aimed at training you to become a staff
officer. That's right. And to operate in a joint
staff. Sure. It was really to standardize a staff
operation for all of the services. And in part to
get to know the personnel in the service.
Very enjoyable, of course, in certain acts of
being in Iran and being with all those people. And
then you went to the Pentagon in intelligence. And
was this, what, a three-year tour? Yeah. Now let's
talk about that. What does it mean? When the people
from career management came down and they called
out our assignment, and of course that was a
support group in Washington, D.C., and I had one of
my classmates came up to me and he said, do you have
any idea what that is? I said, no, never heard of it.
He said, that's a cover assignment for the Central
Intelligence Agency. And he said, I tell you, you
turn it down, because you don't have to take it.
They don't want anybody in the CIA that doesn't
want to be there. He said, because that's a
graveyard for professional officers of any of the
services. Why was it considered a graveyard?
Well, I asked him, why do you think? He said,
because I had been there, and there are civilians,
and many of them are Ivy League civilians, and they
don't like military. And you go get a law
enforcement report. Of course, I had no idea what
my assignment was going to be. I said, well, I'll
take my chances. All through my career, I never
asked for an assignment. I never turned down an
assignment. I'd been fortunate. At the end, I was
still fortunate. So I went to CIA, reported in, and
my assignment was to the War Plans Division.
And what we did We made plans for the use of CIA
assets in the event of war. What do you mean,
assets? Agents and organizations, paramilitary
or guerrilla warfare that they might have in the
area, in the country.
these plans international or did it just deal with
one or two or three nations or was it basically
plans for the whole our whole cia agents
throughout the world that's national just our own
no it didn't include uh our ally assets anything
like that you know we're nato and
on entry to cia of course you have an extensive
background, although it looked like this Hugno or
whatever his name is, they didn't go very far on
him, did they? But he was a political appointee.
They probably didn't. Although, look at the job he
had that was given to God. He was the head of the
clandestine services. So after that extensive
one, and they really went through my background,
and back to my friend Mr. Nelms, he was still alive.
They always listed him as one of my references on
anything. They were going through all of that.
When I went back to Caldwell, they went, what have
you been involved in? Because this wasn't just a
routine, as they always do in any, including
almost any background investigation.
Obviously, they don't just go to the ones you list,
because they know that would be fatal. They try to
find your enemies. People that hardly know you at
all, have you ever heard of them? And I had a
polygraph test, too, to go into CIA. And that's
very important, because it's not only, of course,
for communists and the other things, but to
identify anyone who's homosexual, for example. I
guess now I'm getting the part to be a homosexual,
and I might be an ass then. So as a group, then people
in CIA, both military and civilian, are a
close-knit group. They know they've all been
cleared.
They're heterosexual, at least appear to be, as
well as a polygraph test. And they feel very close
as a family. In fact, they call it a company. That's
their nickname. Everybody belongs to the
company. Yet even Mimi didn't know what I did, or
where I was going, really. Even though we weren't
involved really going out in different nations or
countries, we did have, of course, knowledge of
what was taking place in different countries.
Only the point is need to know. But any
intelligence, any nation, we've demolished our
own intelligence.
Every operation is compartmentalized,
vertical and horizontally, to where that if
an operation is blown, it can't be connected
either, I'll say, horizontal or vertical. So it's
compartmentalized. So you can't let, even in the
CIA, you don't let people know what's taking place
or planned unless they really have a need to know.
Now, when you start coming to Congress, and have a
clandestine operations plan. And you tell the
Congressman, it isn't the Congressman. He's got a
big staff. And you've got people in Congress who
are just delighted in shooting down anything
because they're against it. Especially if he's an
ultra-liberal, and this might be in a country that
he identifies his political leanings towards.
But I wasn't involved. I mean, I wasn't in any
country. I wasn't an agent. What exactly did you do
in the war plans division? Make plans for war in
each country. So in case, for example, a war broke
out in Poland, then the CIA would have... No, no,
no. That's carrying it a little bit too far. These
are really friendly areas of the country. For
example, in Vietnam, or in Korea, things of that
nature. And each of the major headquarters have a
planning group also. This was a national planning
group, then CINCPAC had one, NATO had one. Were
these basically military plans, or evacuation
plans, or strategic plans, or what? Military
plans. Well, they had an evacuation plan, but that
wasn't part of ours. That's another staff
complaint. NATO or American. So with this job, you
must have worked very closely with the military
people in the Pentagon. Joint staff, yes.
But it wasn't Cold War.